# HarpEngine
Welcome to the documentation! On this home page, you will find a basic introduction to the structure of HarpEngine. From there, you should be able to jump around other pages to find what you need.

## Why HarpEngine?
> "Um, actually. It's a framework."

Yes, it is a framework. Why is it a framework and what does that mean?

The reason HarpEngine exists is becasue most game development tools are missing at least one of these features:
- Dedicated 2D and 3D modes
- Immediate-mode drawing
- UI-free development
- Project scaleability

It is a framework because the scripts and backend live on the same level, as opposed to a game engine where the backend is its own dedicated runtime. But, It's called HarpEngine because engine is a fun word, and the developer (Harper) is too stubborn to change it.

[Love2D](https://love2d.org/) and [Processing](https://processing.org/) come close to this sort of project, but both fall a little short. Love2D uses Lua, which is a very fascinating and fun language, but has trouble with scaleability. Processing uses Java, which I _suppose_ is fine, but the build tools are not designed for shipping projects. Finally, there's the [Raylib](https://www.raylib.com/) multimedia library. It has all of the necessary features, but you'll have to program a game engine around it if you want to create a decent project. So HarpEngine was created.

## Installation
This is the easiest part. In Visual Studio, you have two options:
1. Install the [template](https://github.com/harper-rhett/harp-engine-template).
2. Create a new console application and install the [NuGet package](https://www.nuget.org/packages/HarpEngine).

## Structure
HarpEngine is broken up into layers, like so:

```
Engine
├─ Raylib
├─ Windowing
└─ Game
	├─ Update Loop
	├─ Draw Loop
	└─ Scenes
		└─ Entities
```

In the following sections, I will explain the layers to their absolute minimum complexity. Check out their documentation pages for more information.

## Engine
The "engine" initializes a window, controls the core game loop, and is essentially the entry point for the framework. To get started, initialize an engine with settings and attach your game (which you will create in the next step):

```csharp title="Program.cs"
EngineSettings settings = new()
{
	// window size, window name, and game size go here
};
Engine.Initialize(settings);
MyGame myGame = new();
Engine.Start(myGame);
```

P.S. Don't forget to add `using HarpEngine;` to the beginning of your scripts.

## Game
The "game" is where your code begins, and you can plug into the update and draw loops generated by HarpEngine. Create a class and inherit from `Game`:

```csharp title="MyGame.cs"
internal class MyGame : Game
{
	public MyGame()
	{

	}

	public override void Update(float frameTime)
	{
		
	}

	public override void Draw()
	{
		
	}
}
```

At this point, you could go ahead and start programming your game. But then you would miss out on the bulk of the engine's tools. The `Scene` and `Entity` classes do a lot of heavy lifting, so stay tuned.

## Scenes
A scene is essentially a collection of entities with several features:
- Layering: Modify entity update and draw order.
- Registry: High performance look up of entities.
- Timing: Pausing and timer/animation synchronicity.

Your game class is where scenes will be managed. One scene is great for prototyping. Just create a new scene object and then you can add entities to it with ease.

```csharp title="MyGame.cs"
internal class MyGame : Game
{
	Scene scene = new();

	public MyGame()
	{
		new CustomEntity(scene); // a new CustomEntity object is added to the scene
	}

	public override void Update(float frameTime)
	{
		scene.Update(frameTime);
	}

	public override void Draw()
	{
		scene.Draw();
	}
}
```

But of course, one scene will not be enough for a full game. At minimum, a main menu and game scene will probably be necessary. This is why you would inherit from `Scene`:

```csharp title="MenuScene.cs"
internal class MenuScene : Scene
{
	public MenuScene()
	{
		new StartButton(this); // inherits from Entity
	}
}
```

```csharp title="GameScene.cs"
internal class GameScene : Scene
{
	public GameScene()
	{
		new GameManager(this); // inherits from Entity
		for (int enemyIndex = 0; enemyIndex < enemyCount; enemyIndex++)
		{
			new Enemy(this); // inherits from Entity
		}
	}
}
```

Custom scenes are only useful for initializing a scene state. They do not have public update and draw loops. Those are managed internally for handling entities inside a scene.

It may alternatively be convenient for scenes to have their own public facing loops, but ultimately it was decided that managers (inheriting from `Entity`) would make more sense.

So, now your game class may look like this:

```csharp title="MyGame.cs"
internal class MyGame : Game
{
	public static HelloGame Instance;
	private Scene activeScene;

	public HelloGame()
	{
		Instance = this;
		activeScene = new MenuScene();
	}

	public override void Update(float frameTime)
	{
		activeScene.Update(frameTime);
	}

	public override void Draw()
	{
		activeScene.Draw();
	}

	public void Start() // called from StartButton using MyGame.Instance.Start()
	{
		activeScene = new GameScene();
	}
}
```

Multiple scenes can also be run at once, drawing over each other. This is useful for pause menus.

## Entities
Entities are game objects, actors, or nodes. It doesn't matter what you call them. HarpEngine knows them as entities. An entity could be a hero or an enemy. A manager or a utility. In fact, several of the engine's tools such as `ParticleEngine2D` and `Easer` inherit from the `Entity` class. Entity scripts are where most of your game's logic will happen.

Here's an example of an entity that is simply a polygon:

```csharp title="Polygon.cs"
public class Polygon : Entity
{
	public Transform2D Transform = new();
	public int SideCount;
	public float Radius;
	public Color Color;

	public Polygon(Scene scene, float radius, int sideCount, Color color) : base(scene)
	{
		Radius = radius;
		SideCount = sideCount;
		Color = color;
	}

	public override void Draw()
	{
		Primitives.DrawPolygon(Transform.WorldPosition, SideCount, Radius, Transform.WorldRotation, Color);
	}
}
```

## Bindings
You may be wondering how to render sprites or play audio. That's where the bindings come in. HarpEngine is built on top of the [Raylib](https://www.raylib.com/) multimedia library, which handles textures, audio, and much more. It is also written in C. So, in order to communicate with Raylib, HarpEngine contains hundreds of bindings to speak to the C code. You saw one binding in the previous example:

```csharp
Primitives.DrawPolygon(Transform.WorldPosition, SideCount, Radius, Transform.WorldRotation, Color);
```

Here's another example:

```csharp
Sound explosionSound = Sound.Load("explosion.wav");
explosionSound.Play();
```

All of these bindings are nested into their own namespaces as well. For instance, for drawing primitives like polygons, you would need to import the `Graphics` namespace:

```csharp
using HarpEngine.Graphics;
```

Similarly, for audio:

```csharp
using HarpEngine.Audio;
```

If you are familiar with Raylib, you will notice the bindings to be tweaked a good bit. They were modified to fit into a C# workflow as well as possible. You may have to go digging around a bit to find HarpEngine's Raylib equivalents.

## Learn More
Congratulations! You're an expert. That covers the basics. From here I would recommend checking out the [examples](https://github.com/harper-rhett/harp-engine-examples) and reading the [source code](https://github.com/harper-rhett/harp-engine/tree/main/HarpEngine) when documentation isn't sufficient. The source is well organized, and you should be able to find your way around.

Thanks for trying out HarpEngine! Have fun!